.TH CUTBACK 1 "2026-07-20" "cutback 0.1.0" "User Commands"
.SH NAME
cutback \- version control for Kdenlive projects, in plain English
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B cutback watch
.RI [ PATH ]
.br
.B cutback log
.RB [ \-C
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-n
.IR COUNT ]
.RB [ \-\-full ]
.br
.B cutback diff
.RB [ \-C
.IR PATH ]
.RI [ REV1 " [" REV2 ]]
.br
.B cutback restore
.RB [ \-C
.IR PATH ]
.RB [ \-y ]
.I REV
.br
.B cutback branch
.RB [ \-C
.IR PATH ]
.RI [ NAME ]
.br
.B cutback checkout
.RB [ \-C
.IR PATH ]
.I NAME
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B cutback
watches a Kdenlive project file and commits every save to a local git
repository, without any interaction. It then describes what changed between
any two points in that history as sentences an editor can read, such as
.RB \(lq "trimmed interview.mp4 on V2, 0:08 to 0:05" \(rq,
instead of a diff of MLT XML.
.PP
The repository lives in a
.I .cutback
directory beside the project. A project folder that is already a git
repository keeps working normally, since
.B cutback
never touches
.IR .git .
.PP
Media is never copied. Kdenlive project files reference footage by path
rather than embedding it, so the history stays small no matter how much
footage the project uses.
.SH COMMANDS
.TP
.B watch \fR[\fIPATH\fR]
Watch the project and commit each completed save. Runs in the foreground;
stop it with Ctrl\-C. The state at startup is recorded first, so edits made
while
.B cutback
was not running are not lost.
.IP
A save that produces no semantic change makes no commit, because Kdenlive
rewrites the whole document every time it saves. A save that cannot be
parsed is reported and skipped rather than committed.
.TP
.B log
Show the history, newest first, one line per save.
.TP
.B diff \fR[\fIREV1\fR [\fIREV2\fR]]
Describe what changed between two revisions. With no arguments, compares the
two most recent saves. With one, compares that revision against the one
before it.
.TP
.B restore \fIREV\fR
Restore the project file to its exact state at
.IR REV .
The file written is byte for byte the one Kdenlive originally wrote. Whatever
is on disk is committed first, so a restore never discards work.
.TP
.B branch \fR[\fINAME\fR]
Create a branch at the current state, for trying an alternate cut. With no
name, lists the branches and marks the current one. Creating a branch does
not switch to it.
.TP
.B checkout \fINAME\fR
Switch to a branch and restore the project file to that branch's state. The
current state is committed first.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-C ", " \-\-project " " \fIPATH\fR
The project directory, or the
.I .kdenlive
file itself. Defaults to the current directory. If a directory holds more
than one project file,
.B cutback
asks which one rather than guessing.
.TP
.BR \-n ", " \-\-limit " " \fICOUNT\fR
Show at most
.I COUNT
entries.
.RB ( log
only.)
.TP
.B \-\-full
Show every change for each entry, not just the one line summary.
.RB ( log
only.)
.TP
.BR \-y ", " \-\-yes
Do not ask for confirmation.
.RB ( restore
only.)
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Print help. Use
.B \-\-help
rather than
.B \-h
for the longer description of a command.
.TP
.BR \-V ", " \-\-version
Print the version.
.SH REVISIONS
A revision is the short id shown by
.BR "cutback log" ,
or anything git can resolve, including
.BR HEAD ,
.BR HEAD~3 ,
and branch names.
.SH EXAMPLES
Start watching the project in the current directory:
.PP
.RS
.EX
cutback watch
.EE
.RE
.PP
See what has happened, most recent first:
.PP
.RS
.EX
cutback log
.EE
.RE
.PP
See what the last save changed:
.PP
.RS
.EX
cutback diff
.EE
.RE
.PP
Compare two specific points:
.PP
.RS
.EX
cutback diff 8126417 5ee6275
.EE
.RE
.PP
Go back to an earlier state, after closing the project in Kdenlive:
.PP
.RS
.EX
cutback restore 5ee6275
.EE
.RE
.PP
Try an alternate cut without disturbing the current one:
.PP
.RS
.EX
cutback branch short\-version
cutback checkout short\-version
.EE
.RE
.SH FILES
.TP
.I <project>/.cutback/
The git repository holding the history for that project. Deleting it deletes
the history and nothing else.
.SH NOTES
Close the project in Kdenlive before running
.B restore
or
.BR checkout .
Kdenlive holds the document in memory and will write it back over the
restored file on its next save.
.PP
.B cutback
reads the project file to build a description of the changes and writes back
only the exact bytes it stored earlier. It never edits or regenerates the
XML, which matters because a project using track wide effects is not valid
XML to generic tools, as noted in the Kdenlive file format documentation.
.SH LIMITATIONS
Kdenlive only, Linux only. Project files must be document version 1.1, which
is what Kdenlive 23.04 and later write. Older projects are refused with a
message rather than parsed approximately; opening one in Kdenlive and saving
it upgrades the format.
.PP
There is no merge command, no team or cloud features, and no graphical
interface.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.TP
.B 0
Success.
.TP
.B 1
The command failed. The reason is printed to standard error.
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR kdenlive (1),
.BR git (1)
.PP
The Kdenlive file format documentation, which is the primary reference this
tool was built against:
.br
.I https://github.com/KDE/kdenlive/blob/master/dev\-docs/fileformat.md
